---
title: "Spherical Harmonics"
description: An introduction to spherical harmonics and their connection to rotations, Wigner functions, and the addition theorem. The Condon-Shortley convention and Legendre polynomials are also mentioned.
---

This note introduces some of the key facts about spherical harmonics. We try to avoid the approach based on differential equations. Instead, we seek a more intuitive and hence easy-to-remember/apply approach.

## Spherical harmonics and rotation

In Dirac notation the spherical harmonics can be denoted as

$$
Y_l^m=|lm\rangle,\quad
Y_l^m(\theta,\phi)=\langle\hat{\boldsymbol n}|lm\rangle,
\tag{1}
$$

where $l=0,1,...,$ and for each $l$, $m=-l,...,l$. Here $|\hat{\boldsymbol{n}}\rangle$ denotes the spherical angle basis, with $\hat{\boldsymbol n}$ the direction unit vector characterized by spherical angles $\theta$ and $\phi$.

Spherical harmonics are simultaneous eigenstates of $L^2$ and $L_z$,

$$
L^2|lm\rangle=l(l+1)|lm\rangle,\quad L_z|lm\rangle=m|lm\rangle,
$$

where $\boldsymbol{L}=(L_x,L_y,L_z)$ is the angular momentum operator. $\{|lm\rangle\}$ form an orthonormal basis:

$$
\begin{align}
\langle lm|l' m'\rangle=\delta_{ll'}\delta_{mm'}, \quad
&\mathrm{(orthogonality)} \notag \\
\sum_{lm}|lm\rangle\langle lm|=\mathbb{1}. \quad
&\mathrm{(completeness)} \notag
\end{align}
$$

Because any rotation is generated by angular momentum operators $L_i$, which commute with $L^2$, any rotation also commutes with $L^2$, and it will not change the eigenvalue $l$. Hence, using $|lm\rangle$ basis, a rotation operator $R$ is diagonal with respect to $l$

$$
\langle lm|R|l'm'\rangle=\delta_{ll'}\underbrace{\langle lm|R|lm'\rangle}_{D^{(l)}_{mm'}(R)},
\tag{2}
$$

where $D^{(l)}_{mm'}(R)$ is known as the *Wigner functions*. It is the non-trivial part of the rotation matrix elements in the $m$-subspace.

For a given $l$, a rotation is represented by a $(2l+1)\times(2l+1)$ matrix and it mixes eigenstates with different $m$’s. However, any inner product in the $(2l+1)$-dimensional $m$-subspace is rotationally invariant. For example, consider the inner product

$$
\sum_m\langle lm|lm\rangle=2l+1,
$$

where we used the fact that $|lm\rangle$ is normalized. Now, if the inner product is expressed in the spherical angle basis, a.k.a., inserting the identity $\int\mathrm{d}\Omega|\hat{\boldsymbol{n}}\rangle\langle\hat{\boldsymbol{n}}|$, it should have no angular dependence:

$$
\int\mathrm{d}\Omega\underbrace{\sum_m
\langle lm|\hat{\boldsymbol{n}}\rangle
\langle\hat{\boldsymbol{n}}|lm\rangle}_{\text{no angular dependence}}
=4\pi\sum_m|\langle\hat{\boldsymbol{n}}|lm\rangle|^2=2l+1,
$$

where $\mathrm{d}\Omega=\sin\theta\mathrm{d}\theta\mathrm{d}\phi$ is the solid angle element. Therefore we have

$$
\sum_m|\langle\hat{\boldsymbol{n}}|lm\rangle|^2
=\sum_m|Y_l^m(\theta,\phi)|^2=\frac{2l+1}{4\pi}.
\tag{3}
$$

which is known as the *Unsöld's theorem* (can be viewed as a special case of the addition theorem, see later). Note that $\hat{\boldsymbol{n}}$ can be in any direction, or the angles can take any values.

To relate the Wigner functions to spherical harmonics, consider $\hat{\boldsymbol{n}}$ obtained from rotating $\hat{\boldsymbol{z}}$ by the rotation $R(\theta,\phi)=R_z(\phi)R_y(\theta)$. We can use the complex conjugate of Eq. (1) to write

$$
[Y_l^m(\theta,\phi)]^*=
\langle lm|\hat{\boldsymbol{n}}\rangle
=\langle lm|R(\theta,\phi)|\hat{\boldsymbol{z}}\rangle
\tag{4}
$$

To express the spherical harmonics in terms of the Wigner matrix, we insert a completeness relation into Eq. (4):
$$
\langle lm|\hat{\boldsymbol{n}}\rangle
=\sum_{l'm'}
\langle lm|R(\theta,\phi)
|l'm'\rangle\langle l'm'|
\hat{\boldsymbol{z}}\rangle
=\sum_{m'}D^{(l)}_{mm'}[R(\theta,\phi)]
\langle lm'|
\hat{\boldsymbol{z}}\rangle,
\tag{5}
$$

Now, in the $|lm\rangle$ basis, $|\hat{\boldsymbol{z}}\rangle$ must have eigenvalue $m=0$, as

$$
L_z|\hat{\boldsymbol{z}}\rangle\sim(xp_y-yp_x)|\hat{\boldsymbol{z}}\rangle=0.
$$

So

$$
\langle lm'|\hat{\boldsymbol{z}}\rangle
=\delta_{m',0}\langle l0|\hat{\boldsymbol{z}}\rangle.
$$

Combining with the result in Eq. (3), we have

$$
\sum_{m'}|\langle lm'|\hat{\boldsymbol{z}}\rangle|^2
=|\langle l0|\hat{\boldsymbol{z}}\rangle|^2
=\frac{2l+1}{4\pi},
$$

and hence

$$
\langle l0|\hat{\boldsymbol{z}}\rangle
=\sqrt{\frac{2l+1}{4\pi}},\qquad
\langle lm'|\hat{\boldsymbol{z}}\rangle
=\delta_{m',0}\sqrt{\frac{2l+1}{4\pi}},
\tag{6}
$$

where we have chosen the phase of $\langle l0|\hat{\boldsymbol{z}}\rangle$ to be zero (the *Condon-Shortley convention*). It should be mentioned at this point that the *Legendre polynomial* is just defined as

$$
P_l(\cos\theta)=\sqrt{\frac{4\pi}{2l+1}}
\langle\hat{\boldsymbol{n}}|l0\rangle.
\tag{7}
$$

The pre-factor is added to make

$$
P_l(1)=\sqrt{\frac{4\pi}{2l+1}}
\langle\hat{\boldsymbol{z}}|l0\rangle=1.
$$

Plugging Eq. (6) into Eq. (5), we finally get the *relation between Wigner functions and spherical harmonics*:

$$
D^{(l)}_{m0}[R(\theta,\phi)]
=\sqrt{\frac{4\pi}{2l+1}}\langle lm|\hat{\boldsymbol{n}}\rangle
=\sqrt{\frac{4\pi}{2l+1}}[Y_l^m(\theta,\phi)]^*.
\tag{8}
$$

## Addition theorem via rotation

Let us prove the famous *addition theorem of spherical harmonics*. We start by inserting a rotation identity, $R^\dagger R=\mathbb{1}$, and then the completeness relation of spherical harmonics into the definition of the Legendre polynomial (without the constant factor), Eq. (7):

$$
\begin{align}
\langle\hat{\boldsymbol{n}}|l0\rangle
&=\langle\hat{\boldsymbol n}|R^\dagger R|l0\rangle
=\sum_{l'm}\langle R\hat{\boldsymbol n}|l' m\rangle \langle l' m|R|l0\rangle \\
&=\sum_{m}\langle R\hat{\boldsymbol n}|lm\rangle D^{(l)}_{m0}(R)
\quad\text{(by Eq. (2))} \\
&=\sqrt{\frac{4\pi}{2l+1}}\sum_{m}\langle R\hat{\boldsymbol n}|lm\rangle\langle lm|R\hat{\boldsymbol z}\rangle.
\quad\text{(by Eqs. (4) and (8))}
\end{align}
\tag{9}
$$

Now let the directions of the rotated vectors be defined as

$$
R\hat{\boldsymbol n}\rightarrow(\theta_1,\phi_1),\quad
R\hat{\boldsymbol z}\rightarrow(\theta_2,\phi_2).
$$

Recall that the polar angle $\theta$ is the angle between $\hat{\boldsymbol n}$ and $\hat{\boldsymbol z}$. Since rotations preserve angles, the angle between $R\hat{\boldsymbol n}$ and $R\hat{\boldsymbol z}$ is still $\theta$. Using the above definitions and restoring the constant factor, Eq. (9) becomes

$$
P_l(\cos\theta)
=\frac{4\pi}{2l+1}\sum_{m}Y_l^m(\theta_1,\phi_1)[Y_l^m(\theta_2,\phi_2)]^*.
$$

QED.
